Welcome my friend to today's
lecture on inequality.
Let's unpack the mystery of
this concept without needing a
PhD or a panic attack concept.
Explanation.
Inequality in the world of reasoning
ability refers to those questions based
on mathematical comparisons between
different elements or variables.
These questions cleverly use
standard relational symbols.
You know, like the greater than, the
less than the greater than or equal to
the, less than or equal to, and of course
the ever so simple equal to science.
Your ultimate goal here, my friend, is to
determine the true relationship between
specified elements based on a given set of
statements involving these very symbols.
Essentially it's a test of your logical
deduction skills and how well you
understand relational hierarchies.
No rocket science, just pure
logic, real world relevance.
Now, why is this important
for an officer like you?
Well, understanding inequalities
is absolutely vital for comparing
financial data, assessing various
risks, and evaluating performance
metrics in the real world.
It allows you to quickly discern whether
a value is superior or inferior, which
is super crucial for making sound
judgements in your daily operations.
Imagine a balance sheet and you are trying
to figure out which numbers are tipping.
The scales inequalities help you do
just that and quickly break down off
question types based on past exam
patterns for your upcoming exam.
Inequality problems typically pop
up in a few interesting formats.
First up, we have direct
inequalities, which account for
a good 55 to 65% of questions.
Here a single or combined statement is
given and you just need to figure out if
one or more conclusions follow from it.
Simple, right next around 15 to 20% are
missing symbol or fill in the blanks.
Questions in these statements have one
or more inequality, symbols missing, and
you need to be a detective selecting the
option that makes a given conclusion true.
Then comes reverse inequalities making up.
10 to 15%.
This is where the conclusions are given
as true and you need to work backward.
Finding which set of statements
actually supports those conclusions.
Bit like solving a mystery novel, huh?
Following that, we have the famous
either or cases, about five to 10%.
This happens when two conclusions are
individually uncertain, but together they
cover all possible relationships leading
to that classic either or scenario.
And finally though,
less common, zero to 5%.
Sometimes you might
encounter coded inequalities.
While often a separate topic, it
can be a subtype where symbols are
replaced by codes, just like you
might see in a coded topic question.
It's all about deciphering the
secret language formulas and tricks.
Let's talk about the bread and
butter, the basic inequality.
Symbols.
A greater than B means A is greater than
B. A less than B means A is less than B, a
greater than equal to B means A is greater
than or equal to B. A less than equal
to B means A is less than or equal to B.
And A equal to B means well, A is equal
to B. Now for the hierarchy of symbols.
Think of it like a pecking order.
The strongest are greater
than and less than are strict.
Inequalities then come greater
than equal to and less than equal
to the inclusive inequalities.
And finally at the bottom.
But equally important is equal to
the equal for deriving relationships.
There are some key tricks.
First, for a definite relationship
to exist between two elements.
All inequality signs between them must
point in the same consistent direction.
It's like everyone facing
the same way in a parade.
Second, if a definite relationship
exists and both strict, like
greater than or less than.
And inclusive, like greater than
equal to or less than equal to
signs are present in the path.
Guess what?
The strict sign always prevails.
If only inclusive signs and
equal to are present, then the
inclusive sign will determine it.
Simple logic, isn't it?
And third, if you ever encounter opposite
signs, like greater than, less than
or less than, greater than between
two elements, immediately know this.
No definite relationship can
be established between them.
It's like trying to go
two directions at once.
You just can't get anywhere.
Methods of solving.
All right, let's get down to the brass
tacks, how to solve these puzzles.
The first method is combining statements.
If you're given multiple statements,
for example, A greater than B.
B, greater than equal to C, c. Equal
to D, your smart move is to combine
them into a single continuous chain.
Just identify the common elements and
link them up, for instance, A greater
than B, greater than equal to C, equal
to D. C. How neat and tidy that looks.
Next we have tracing the path For each
conclusion, you need to check first,
identify the two elements, whose
relationship needs to be determined.
Then simply trace the path
between these two elements in your
beautifully combined statement.
It's like following a treasure map.
After tracing, you apply the
hierarchy and consistency rules.
Check for same direction.
Make sure all signs along the traced
path point in the same direction, like
A, greater than B, greater than C, or
A, less than B, less than C if they
are pointing in different directions.
No definite conclusion is possible.
Full stop.
If they are in the same direction,
then you look for the strongest sign.
Determine the strongest sign present.
In that path, this strongest sign
will be your final relationship.
For example, for P. Greater than
Q. Greater than equal to R. The
strong sign greater than determines.
P greater than R, and for P, greater
than equal to Q, equal to R. The
inclusive sign greater than equal
to determines P, greater than equal
to R. It's all about power play.
Now, the tricky part,
handling either or cases.
This situation arises when individual
conclusions are false or cannot be
determined, but when you combine them,
they magically cover all possibilities.
There are specific conditions
for this either or to occur.
First, both individual conclusions
must be uncertain, either
false or cannot be determined.
Second, the elements involved in both
conclusions must be exactly the same.
And third, the combination of both
conclusions must cover all three
possibilities greater than, less
than and equal to common either or.
Scenarios usually happen if the
derived relationship is a greater
than equal to B, and your conclusions
are a greater than B and a equal to.
Or if no definite relationship can be
established at all, maybe due to those
pesky opposite signs and conclusions are
A greater than B, a less than B, or A
equal to B, or perhaps combinations like A
greater than B and a less than equal to B.
Got it.
Shortcuts and smart techniques.
Let me share some clever
shortcuts and smart techniques.
Think of the gate concept.
Visualize inequality, symbols
as little gates for greater
than and greater than equal to.
Think of an open gate from left to right
for less than and less than equal to.
It's an open gate from right to
left and for equal to, it's an
open gate in both directions.
Free passage.
You can only pass through a gate if it's
open in the direction you are moving.
So to establish a relationship from
A to Z, all gates between A and
Z must be open in the direction
from A to Z. Simple, right?
Then there's immediate
opposite sign detection.
As soon as you encounter something
like A greater than B, less than C,
or A, less than B, greater than C, you
should immediately know that no definite
relationship exists between A and C.
This saves you precious
time from tracing further.
Just like spotting a dead end on a map.
Also practice mental chain
building for simple statements.
Train your brain to combine them mentally
without having to write out the full
chain and always focus on start and end.
When you are checking a conclusion like
X, greater than Z, only trace the path
from X to Z completely ignoring other
irrelevant parts of the statement.
Don't get distracted by the noise.
Finally.
Understand the power of signs.
Remember that strict inequalities
greater than less than are stronger
than inclusive ones, greater
than equal to less than equal to.
If a strong sign is present
in a consistent path, it
totally dictates the outcome.
It's the boss of the group.
Common mistakes and misconceptions.
Now, let's talk about the
potholes on this road.
Common mistakes and misconceptions.
First reversing signs incorrectly.
Don't confuse a greater than B with B
greater than A. Remember, A greater than B
is perfectly equivalent to B, less than A.
It's just looking from a different side.
Second, ignoring equal to don't
assume equal to is a weak sign
that can just be brushed aside.
A equal to B means A and B are
interchangeable for comparison
purposes with other elements.
They're like twins.
Okay.
Third, over concluding from no conclusion
if no definite relationship can be
established, say due to opposite
signs, please do not assume a greater
than or less than relationship.
It simply means it cannot be determined.
Uncertainty is an answer to.
Fourth misinterpreting either or
don't incorrectly apply the either
or case when conditions, especially
covering all possibilities are not met.
Always, always check if the two
conclusions truly cover all possible
outcomes between the elements.
And lastly, careless Combining
making errors when linking
multiple statements can lead to a
completely incorrect overall chain.
Be meticulous, like a good
Detective WW framework summary.
Let's quickly summarize this whole
inequality saga using our WW framework.
So what is inequality?
It's about questions.
Assessing logical relationships
between elements using
standard inequality symbols.
Why do we study it?
Because it's crucial for evaluating
logical deduction, analytical
thinking, and quick comparison skills.
Very important for your exam.
When is it applied?
Frequently in competitive exams,
reasoning sections to test
your inferential reasoning.
Where can you find it?
It's common in banking.
SSC railway and other government
entrance examinations.
Basically it's everywhere.
Who needs to know this?
All your friends and aspirants.
Preparing for aptitude
based competitive exams.
And how do you conquer it?
By combining statements,
tracing parts, and applying
the clear rules of inequality.
Hierarchy and consistency.
Just follow the recipe fully.
Worked out.
Examples.
Let's look at some fully
worked out examples.
Example one.
Direct inequality question.
Statement.
P. Greater than Q, greater than equal to
R, equal to S, less than T. Conclusions
one P greater than R two s, less than
p. A only conclusion one is true.
B. Only conclusion two is true.
C. Both conclusions one and two are true.
D, neither conclusion one nor two is true.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Solution.
Step one.
Let's analyze conclusion one.
P greater than R. From the given
statement, the path between p and R is P
greater than Q, greater than equal to R.
Notice all signs are pointing in the
same direction towards p. The signs
involved here are greater than, which is
strong and greater than equal to which
is weak according to our hierarchy rule.
The strong sign greater than
prevails, therefore be greater
than R is definitely true.
Take that one off, step two.
Now let's analyze conclusion two s less
than p. From the statement, the path
between S and P is P, greater than Q,
greater than equal to R, equal to S.
If we read this from P to S, the path
looks like P, greater than Q, greater
than equal to R, equal to S. Again,
all signs are in the same direction.
Pointing towards P.
The signs involved are greater than, which
is strong, greater than equal to which
is weak and equal to which is the weakest
since greater than is the strong sign.
It prevails.
So we get P. Greater than S
and P. Greater than S is simply
equivalent to S, less than P, right?
Therefore, S less than P
is also definitely true.
Another tick.
Step three.
Time to select the correct
option since both conclusion
one and two are definitely true.
The correct option my friends, is C.
Example two combining multiple statements,
question statements, A greater than
equal to B, C, greater than A D, less
than equal to C. Conclusions one B
less than C, 2D, less than equal to B.
A only conclusion one is true.
B. Only conclusion two is true.
C. Both conclusions one and two are true.
D, neither conclusion one nor two is true.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Solution.
Step one, first order of business.
Combine these statements
into a single need chain.
We have a greater than equal to
B, then we have C greater than A.
Combining these two gives us C
greater than a greater than equal to.
Now we add D, less than equal to C.
Combining this with what we have.
D, less than equal to C, greater
than A, greater than equal to
B. There's your complete chain.
Step two, let's analyze conclusion
one B, less than C. From our combined
statement, the path between B and C is C,
greater than A, greater than equal to B.
Reading from C to B, all signs are
pointing in the same direction towards
C. The signs involved are greater than.
Which is the strong one and greater
than equal to which is the weak one.
The strong sign greater than prevails.
So we get C greater than B and C greater
than B is just the same as B, less than C.
Therefore, conclusion
one is definitely true.
Bravo.
Step three.
Now for conclusion 2D, less than equal
to B. From our combined statement, the
path between D and B is D, less than
equal to C, greater than A, greater than
equal to B. Look closely friends between
D and B, there are opposite signs.
Specifically you see less
than equal to from D to C, and
then greater than from C to a.
When opposite signs pop up in the
path, remember our rule, no definite
relationship can be established.
Therefore, conclusion two
is not definitely true.
It's uncertain.
Step four, select the correct option
since only conclusion one is true.
The correct option is a example three.
Either or.
Case question Statement.
M. Greater than N. Equal to O. Greater
than equal to P, less than Q. Conclusions
one M greater than p. Two M equal
to PA only conclusion one is true.
B, only conclusion two is true.
C. Either conclusion one or two is true.
D, neither conclusion one nor two is true.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Solution.
Step one.
Let's analyze conclusion one.
M greater than P from the statement, the
path between M and P is M, greater than
n equal to O, greater than equal to PC.
All signs are pointing in the same
direction towards m. The signs
involved are greater than our strong
contender equal to the weakest and
greater than equal to the weak one.
The strong sign greater
than prevails here.
So M, greater than P is the definite
relationship derived from the statement.
Therefore, conclusion
one is definitely true.
Step two.
Now let's analyze conclusion two
M equal to P from the statement.
As we just determined in step
one, the definite relationship
is M, greater than P.
So if M is definitely greater
than P, can M also be equal to p?
Nope.
Therefore, M equal to
P is definitely false.
Step three, we need to check
for the either or case for
an either or case to apply.
Both individual conclusions must
be uncertain or false, and together
they must cover all possibilities.
But in this specific case, conclusion one.
M greater than P is definitely true.
And conclusion two M equal
to P is definitely false.
Since conclusion one is already true,
there's no either or situation here.
The answer is just only
conclusion one is true.
Now, a quick side note, a common trap,
sometimes friends immediately look for
an either or without first accurately
figuring out the definite relationship.
What if the original statement
had led to M greater than equal
to P instead of M, greater than P?
For instance, if the statement
were M greater than equal to N,
equal to O, greater than equal to
P, then the derived relationship
between M and P would be M greater
than equal to P in such a scenario.
Conclusion one.
M greater than P would be
uncertain because M could also
be equal to P. Conclusion two.
M equal to P would also be uncertain
because M could be greater than P,
but together M greater than P or M
equal to P perfectly covers M greater
than equal to P. In that different
scenario, the answer would indeed be.
Either conclusion one or two is true,
but based on our Devon statement, M,
greater than n equal to O, greater
than equal to P, less than Q. The
strongest sign in the consistent path
from M two P is greater than meaning.
M greater than P is the
definite conclusion.
Since M greater than P is true, M
equal to P must be false, so the answer
is just only conclusion one is true.
This highlights the importance of getting
that definite relationship right first.
Step four, select the correct
option since only conclusion one.
M greater than P is definitely true.
Based on our statement.
The correct option is a thank you.
See you in the next lecture.